Feature/m0078 ddg 266 ej api trace (#32)
MicroEJ/docs: ApplicationDeveloperGuide/trace.rst

  Select the Category ``Runtime`` and check the option ``Enable execution traces``.

- Multiple ways are available to start and stop the trace system:
  
  - from the **Java API**, the methods ``Tracer.startTrace()`` and ``Tracer.stopTrace()``,
  
  - from the **C API**, the methods ``LLTRACE_IMPL_start(void)`` and ``LLTRACE_IMPL_stop(void)``,
  
  - from the **launcher configuration** of the application. 
    This option can be accessed by right clicking on the project and going to ``Run As > Run Configurations`` then in the tab ``Configuration``.
    Select the Category ``Runtime`` and check the option ``Start execution traces automatically``.

Implementation
==============

- By default, the Trace API displays a message in the standard output for every ``recordEvent(...)`` and ``recordEventEnd(...)`` method calls. 

- It does not print a timestamp when displaying the trace message, it only print the ID of the recorded event followed by the value given in parameters.

- The default implementation can be overridden by implementing the ``LLTRACE_impl.h`` file.

- An implementation of this API is mapped to **SEGGER SystemView** concepts.

>   - 

Reviewer: Empty bullet

Examples
========
- Trace a single event.

  .. code-block:: java
      
    private static final Tracer tracer = new Tracer("Application", 100);

    public static void main(String[] args) {
      Tracer.startTrace();
      tracer.recordEvent(0);
    }

  - Ouput on serial port (standard ouput): 

  .. code-block:: xml

    VM START
    [TRACE] [1] Declare group "Application"
    [TRACE] [1] Event 0x0

- Trace a method with a start showing the parameters of the method and an end showing the result.
  
  .. code-block:: java

    private static final Tracer tracer = new Tracer("Application", 100);

    public static void main(String[] args) {
      Tracer.startTrace();
      int a = 14;
      int b = 54;
      add(a, b);
    }

    public static int add(int a, int b) {
      tracer.recordEvent(1, a, b);
      int result = a + b;
      tracer.recordEventEnd(1, result);
      return result;
    }

  - Ouput on serial port (standard ouput): 

  .. code-block:: xml

    VM START
    [TRACE] [1] Declare group "Application"
    [TRACE] [1] Event 0x1 (14 [0xE],54 [0x36])
    [TRACE] [1] Event End 0x1 (68 [0x44])

>   - When using a serial port reader that can display the timestamp at each print, you can compute the execution time of the traced function.

Reviewer: I don't know if it is a good idea to say that. 
With this solution, the timestamp depends on the baudrate and the serial reader. 

Actually, that's why we didn't put timestamp in the traces when printing on the serial port. The print is so slow that it can drastically impact the performances.

.. _apiTrace:

API Trace
#########

Description
===========

- The Trace API allows users to record events for debugging and monitoring purposes.
  It gives access to ``Tracer`` objects that are named and can produce a limited number of different event types.

- A record is an event type identified by an ``eventID`` and can have a list of values.
- It can be a single event or a period of time with a start and an end.

- MicroEJ gives access to two Trace APIs:
  
  - A **Java API** that can be used to trace Java application. The Javadoc is available 
    `here <https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/foundation/ej/trace/Tracer.html>`_.
    

>   - To add the library to your project, add the following dependency line in your module.ivy file:

Author: Changed indentation of the all document and fixed this wrong one.

>   - To add the library to your project, add the following dependency line in your module.ivy file:

Reviewer: Indentation is not good for several bullets lists. Remove extra spaces at the beginning of the line.

>   - To add the library to your project, add the following dependency line in your module.ivy file:

Author: Changed indentation, is it good now ?

        
      .. code:: xml
        
        <dependency org=“ej.api” name=trace rev=“x.y.z”/>
  
  - A **C API** implemented in the file ``LLTRACE_impl.h``.
    This file is available in the ``platform-bsp`` project defined in the sources of the platform.

To activate the trace system on the platform, the property ``core.trace.enabled`` needs to be set to true.
  
  - Right click on the project and go to ``Run As > Run Configurations``,
  - In the tab ``Configuration``, select the category ``Runtime``,
  - Check the option ``Enable execution traces``.

Multiple ways are available to start and stop the trace system:
  
  - from the **Java API**, the methods ``Tracer.startTrace()`` and ``Tracer.stopTrace()``,
  
  - from the **C API**, the functions ``LLTRACE_IMPL_start(void)`` and ``LLTRACE_IMPL_stop(void)``,
  
  - from the **launcher configuration** of the application: 
    - Right click on the project and go to ``Run As > Run Configurations``,
    - In the tab ``Configuration``, select the Category ``Runtime``,

>     - Check the option ``Start execution traces automatically``.

Reviewer: These items are not displayed properly in the github preview.

> To record an event, use the method ``recordEvent(int eventId)``. The event ID needs to be in the range ``0 to nbEventTypes-1``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To record an event, use the method ``recordEvent(int eventId)``. The event ID needs to be in the range ``0`` to ``nbEventTypes-1``.
```

Specify what is `nbEventTypes`.

Author: Added small part on initialization of the Tracer Object and link to ``nbEventTypes``.

> The methods ``recordEvent(...)`` always needs the eventID as the first parameter and can have up to ten int parameters as custom value for the event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The methods ``recordEvent(...)`` always needs the eventID as the first parameter and can have up to ten int parameters as custom values for the event.
```

  - The ``recordEventEnd(...)`` method can also have another int parameter for a custom value for the event end.

- This library gives access to a String constant ``TRACE_ENABLED_CONSTANT_PROPERTY`` representing the :ref:`BON Constant <section.classpath.elements.constants>` ``core.trace.enabled``.

>   - By adding an if statement using this **BON Constant**, when set it to false, the code inside the if statement (here the tracing) will 
>     not be embedded with the application and thus, will not impact the performances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - This **BON Constant** can be used to remove, at build time, portions of code when trace is disabled. To do that, just surround tracer record calls with a if statement that checks the state of the constant. When the constant is set to false, the code inside the if statement will not be embedded with the application and thus, will not impact the performances.
```

>   - This **BON Constant** can be used to remove, at build time, portions of code when trace is disabled. To do that, just surround tracer record calls with a if statement that checks the state of the constant. When the constant is set to false, the code inside the if statement will not be embedded with the application and thus, will not impact the performances.

Reviewer: Remove bullet.

    .. code-block:: java
      

>       if(Constants.getBoolean(Tracer.TRACE_ENABLED_CONSTANT_PROPERTY)) {
>         tracer.recordEventEnd(0);
>       }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      if(Constants.getBoolean(Tracer.TRACE_ENABLED_CONSTANT_PROPERTY)) {
        // This code is not embedded if TRACE_ENABLED_CONSTANT_PROPERTY is set to false.       
        tracer.recordEventEnd(0);
      }
```

Implementation
==============

- By default, the Trace API displays a message in the standard output for every ``recordEvent(...)`` and ``recordEventEnd(...)`` method calls. 

> - It does not print a timestamp when displaying the trace message because it drastically impacts the performances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It does not print a timestamp when displaying the trace message because it can drastically impact the performances.
```

>   It only print the ID of the recorded event followed by the value given in parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It only prints the ID of the recorded event followed by the value given in parameters.
```

>   It only prints the ID of the recorded event followed by the value given in parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It only prints the ID of the recorded event followed by the values given in parameters.
```

- The default implementation can be overridden by implementing the ``LLTRACE_impl.h`` file.

> - An implementation of this API is mapped to **SEGGER SystemView** concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An implementation of this API mapped to **SEGGER SystemView** concepts is available.
```

>   - This allow to visualize the different trace directly in **SEGGER SystemView**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - This allows to visualize the different traces directly in **SEGGER SystemView**.
```

  - The **SystemView** module is added to the targetted platform and initialized in the main function of the platform.

>   - Then a low-level API named ``LLTRACE_sysview.c`` implements the ``LLTRACE_impl.h`` defined functions, using the functions of the **SystemView** module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Then a low-level API named ``LLTRACE_sysview.c`` implements the function defined in ``LLTRACE_impl.h`` using the **SystemView** library.
```

>   - Then a low-level API named ``LLTRACE_sysview.c`` implements the function defined in ``LLTRACE_impl.h`` using the **SystemView** library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Then a low-level API named ``LLTRACE_sysview.c`` implements the functions defined in ``LLTRACE_impl.h`` using the **SystemView** library.
```

Examples
========
- Trace a single event.

  .. code-block:: java
      
    private static final Tracer tracer = new Tracer("Application", 100);

    public static void main(String[] args) {
      Tracer.startTrace();
      tracer.recordEvent(0);
    }

>   - Ouput on serial port (standard ouput): 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Ouput on serial port (standard ouput): 
```

  .. code-block:: xml

    VM START
    [TRACE] [1] Declare group "Application"
    [TRACE] [1] Event 0x0

- Trace a method with a start showing the parameters of the method and an end showing the result.
  
  .. code-block:: java

    private static final Tracer tracer = new Tracer("Application", 100);

    public static void main(String[] args) {
      Tracer.startTrace();
      int a = 14;
      int b = 54;
      add(a, b);
    }

    public static int add(int a, int b) {
      tracer.recordEvent(1, a, b);
      int result = a + b;
      tracer.recordEventEnd(1, result);
      return result;
    }

>   - Ouput on serial port (standard ouput): 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Ouput on serial port (standard ouput): 
```

.. _apiTrace:

API Trace
#########

Description
===========

The Trace API allows users to record events for debugging and monitoring purposes.
It gives access to ``Tracer`` objects that are named and can produce a limited number of different event types.

A record is an event type identified by an ``eventID`` and can have a list of values.
It can be a single event or a period of time with a start and an end.

MicroEJ gives access to two Trace APIs:
  
- A **Java API** that can be used to trace Java application. The Javadoc is available 
  `here <https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/foundation/ej/trace/Tracer.html>`_.
  
  - To add the library to your project, add the following dependency line in your module.ivy file:
      
    .. code:: xml
      
      <dependency org=“ej.api” name=trace rev=“x.y.z”/>
  
- A **C API** implemented in the file ``LLTRACE_impl.h``.
  This file is available in the ``platform-bsp`` project defined in the sources of the platform.

To activate the trace system on the platform, the property ``core.trace.enabled`` needs to be set to true.
  

> - Right click on the project and go to ``Run As > Run Configurations``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Right-click on the project and go to ``Run As > Run Configurations``,
```

- In the tab ``Configuration``, select the category ``Runtime``,

- Check the option ``Enable execution traces``.

Multiple ways are available to start and stop the trace system:
  
- from the **Java API**, the methods ``Tracer.startTrace()`` and ``Tracer.stopTrace()``,

- from the **C API**, the functions ``LLTRACE_IMPL_start(void)`` and ``LLTRACE_IMPL_stop(void)``,

- from the **launcher configuration** of the application: 

>   - Right click on the project and go to ``Run As > Run Configurations``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Right-click on the project and go to ``Run As > Run Configurations``,
```

  - In the tab ``Configuration``, select the Category ``Runtime``,

  - Check the option ``Start execution traces automatically``.

> To record an event, you first need to instantiate a ``Tracer`` object by calling its contructor with two parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To record an event, you first need to instantiate a ``Tracer`` object by calling its constructor with two parameters.
```

> The first parameter, ``name``, is a String that will represent the name of the ``Tracer`` object group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first parameter, ``name``, is a String that will represent the ``Tracer`` object group's name.
```

The second parameter, ``nbEventTypes``, is an integer representing the maximum number of event types available for the group.

Then, you can use the method ``recordEvent(int eventId)``. 
The event ID needs to be in the range ``0`` to ``nbEventTypes-1`` with ``nbEventTypes`` the maximum number of event types set when initializing the ``Tracer`` object.
The methods ``recordEvent(...)`` always needs the eventID as the first parameter and can have up to ten int parameters as custom values for the event.

To record the end of an event, use the method ``recordEventEnd(int eventID)``. 
It will trace the duration of an event previously recorded with one of the ``recordEvent(int)`` methods.

> The ``recordEventEnd(...)`` method can also have another int parameter for a custom value for the event end. It can be used to trace the returned value of a method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``recordEventEnd(...)`` method can also have another int parameter for a custom value for the event end. One can use it to trace the returned value of a method.
```

This library gives access to a String constant ``TRACE_ENABLED_CONSTANT_PROPERTY`` representing the :ref:`BON Constant <section.classpath.elements.constants>` ``core.trace.enabled``.

This **BON Constant** can be used to remove, at build time, portions of code when trace is disabled. 

> To do that, just surround tracer record calls with a if statement that checks the state of the constant. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do that, just surround tracer record calls with a if statement that checks the constant's state. 
```

When the constant is set to false, the code inside the if statement will not be embedded with the application and thus, will not impact the performances.

.. code-block:: java
  
  if(Constants.getBoolean(Tracer.TRACE_ENABLED_CONSTANT_PROPERTY)) {
    // This code is not embedded if TRACE_ENABLED_CONSTANT_PROPERTY is set to false.       
    tracer.recordEventEnd(0);
  }

Implementation
==============

By default, the Trace API displays a message in the standard output for every ``recordEvent(...)`` and ``recordEventEnd(...)`` method calls. 

It does not print a timestamp when displaying the trace message because it can drastically impact the performances.
It only prints the ID of the recorded event followed by the values given in parameters.

> The default implementation can be overridden by implementing the ``LLTRACE_impl.h`` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One can override the default implementation by implementing the ``LLTRACE_impl.h`` file.
```

An implementation of this API mapped to **SEGGER SystemView** concepts is available.

> - This allows to visualize the different traces directly in **SEGGER SystemView**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This implementation allows visualizing the different traces directly in **SEGGER SystemView**.
```

> .. _apiTrace:

Reviewer 2: Please rebase this branch on master without the new tutorials section stuff

Author: Branch was rebased on master.

API Trace
#########

Description
===========
The API Trace allow users to trace events for debug and monitoring.
It gives access to a Tracer object that are named and can produce a limited number of difirent event types.

By default, this API show the traces using the default output stream.

The library contains one class: `ej.trace.Tracer`.

> - This class gives access to the String constant ``TRACE_ENABLED_CONSTANT_PROPERTY`` representing the System property ``core.trace.enabled``.

Author: This part was removed but will be present in the tutorial Log traces in an application.
Should we keep a part on this point on this doc ?

> - This class gives access to the String constant ``TRACE_ENABLED_CONSTANT_PROPERTY`` representing the System property ``core.trace.enabled``.

Reviewer: I think so. We should explain that using these BON constants allows to define some portions of code that can be removed at compile time (no impact on the footprint and the performances when disabled)

- A Tracer object can be initialized using two properties:

   - A String representing the name of the Tracer,
   - An int for the maximum number of event types.

- The event IDs available for this group are ``from 0 to nbEventTypes-1``.
- If the Tracer cannot be created, the method will throw an ``InternalError``.
- By default, the trace system is stopped. To start it, use the static method ``startTrace()``.
- To stop the trace system, use the static method ``stopTrace()``.
- The static method ``isTraceStarted()`` can be used to test whether the trace system is started or not.
- To record an event, use the method ``recordEvent(int eventId)``. The event ID need to be in range ``0 to nbEventTypes-1``.

> - The method ``recordEvent(...)`` always need the eventID as the first parameter and can have up to ten int parameters as custom value for the event.

Reviewer: In the "description" section, keep a paragraph about how to record events. 
You explain how to active the trace, how to start it. We don't explain how to do a trace.
